README.md, before:

# *Abies Cephalonica* Stress Monitoring in Greece

## Description
This research project analyzes drought impacts on Greek mountain ecosystems, focusing on fir forest (*Abies cephalonica*) die-off in regions such as Chelmos, Mainalo, Taygetos, Parnonas, and Epirus. The work includes environmental monitoring, GIS mapping, and climate data analysis, under the scope of providing valuable insights for the development of resilience and restoration strategies. [source: [dasarxeio.com](https://dasarxeio.com/2025/08/01/145507/?fbclid=IwQ0xDSwL56MVleHRuA2FlbQIxMQABHkbJokQhCMbPWyp9B5BhfTiQjc_i3rtFTZOzDlfeDrLWeoQALBKSSqs7HktX_aem_boICuxbIGToYjKLmx3ZoFQ)]

The extent of *Abies Cephalonica* species within the Natura 2000 network is provided by [FORESTLIFE](https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=56154daffc044c99a6a12083c4d814c6#overview) in vector format. 

The methodology is based on lessons learned from our work with [Copernicus Emergency Management Service (EMS)](https://emergency.copernicus.eu/), in activation [EMSN217 - Fire risk assessment in East Sardinia, Italy](https://riskandrecovery.emergency.copernicus.eu/EMSN217/).

## EODC Development
Based on [Open Data Cube](https://www.opendatacube.org/). For the EODC, the following steps have been completed:
1. Created a [database](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/database/setup.html) and [credentials](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/database/passing-configuration.html)
2. Created a Python `environment.yaml`
3. [Initialized](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/cli.html#datacube-system-init) the datacube schema
4. Generated a tiling grid schema covering the affected [Natura2000](https://natura2000.eea.europa.eu/) sites
5. [Defined EO products](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/product-definitions.html)
6. Verified dataset storage, indexing, and retrieval from NAS using EO3 datasets and EODC

### Tiling schema
The study area is divided into 21 tiles, each measuring 48 × 48 km. [Tile naming](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/guides/reference/collection_3_summary_grid/) follows a `x00y00` format without negative indices. In 20-m imagery this translates to `time×variables×2400×2400` pixel time series. A 2400×2400 size was found appropriate for an effective processing in a 32GB - 8 CPU configuration, with an average product delivery time of 7 minutes.

![Grid](wiki_img/Grid.jpg)

## Composite generation
The composite pipeline automates the creation of 20-m monthly median mosaics of Sentinel-2 L2A data using the [Planetary Computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a) through the [STAC catalog](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1).

### Key points
- **Input**: GeoJSON configuration files define the year–month and tile code to process. *Now configured in [`./src/run_composites.py#L36`](https://github.com/fotakide/DieOffMonitoring/blob/main/src/run_composites.py#L42).*
- **Data access**: Imagery is retrieved from the STAC catalog using [odc-stac](https://odc-stac.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), filtered by cloud cover (`≤70%`) and data quality (`nodata < 33%`).
- **Native resolutions**: Sentinel-2 provides bands both at 10 m and 20 m resolutions. Since 10 m bands are not natively [available at 20 m](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a), we apply the `rasterio.enums.Resampling.average` method to bin the resolution to 20m. 
  - Implementation note: *If it is applied on a subset the values may vary (due to starting pixel and shape of the raster), but if it applied on a whole granule the values are identical*. [Sen2Cor](https://step.esa.int/main/snap-supported-plugins/sen2cor/sen2cor-v2-12/) uses [`skimage.measure.block_reduce`](https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/blob/v0.25.2/skimage/measure/block.py#L5-L94) (and from [docs](https://scikit-image.org/docs/0.25.x/api/skimage.measure.html#skimage.measure.block_reduce)), as it can be found in [S2 MPC L2A ATBD](https://step.esa.int/thirdparties/sen2cor/2.10.0/docs/S2-PDGS-MPC-L2A-ATBD-V2.10.0.pdf), to perform 2×2 mean aggregation (binning), as it can be found in the `L2A_Tables.py` module. This is also available in `xarray`'s [`coarsen`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.coarsen.html#xarray-dataarray-coarsen) function, which is a replica of this function as stated [in this issue](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/2525). This ensures consistency with ESA’s Sen2Cor processing chain.
- **Baseline change**: Working with S2-L2A time series from MS PC requires a [baseline change](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a#Baseline-Change) [to Sen2Cor `4.00` ](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/-/copernicus-sentinel-2-major-products-upgrade-upcoming). For scenes after `2022-01-05` (January 25th, 2022), an offset of `-1000` is applied.
- **Masking**: Cloud, shadow, cirrus, and snow/ice pixels are masked using the Scene Classification Layer (SCL).
- **Spectral indices**: [NDVI](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=58), [EVI](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=16), and [PSRI2](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=69) are calculated per timestamp before median temporal reduction.
- **Reprojection**: Before reduction, the data cubes are aligned and reprojected in [ETRS89-extended / LAEA Europe (EPSG:3035)](https://epsg.io/3035) with [odc-geo](https://github.com/opendatacube/odc-geo), using `rasterio`'s [bilinear resampling](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/en/stable/topics/resampling.html). If more than two UTM zones are included, a mosaic is generated.
- **Compositing**: A [median temporal](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/generated/xarray.Dataset.median.html#xarray-dataset-median) composite is produced per tile and month.
- **Output**: Results are stored as Cloud-Optimized GeoTIFFs (COGs), with metadata ([dataset definitions](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/dataset-documents.html)) recorded in both [EO3 YAML](https://eodatasets.readthedocs.io/en/eodatasets3-1.9.3/) and [STAC JSON](https://pystac.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) formats for datacube indexing. The `assets`/`measurements` of the bands are recorded in paths relevant to the metadata document location. *To do so on a local machine, raster information were referenced [by explicitly providing geo and pixel](https://eodatasets.readthedocs.io/en/eodatasets3-1.9.3/_modules/eodatasets3/assemble.html#DatasetPrepare.note_measurement) information to the metadata preparation module.* To load the relevant paths of raster images from NAS into `xarray`, [url patching](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/indexed-data/generate/datacube.Datacube.load.html#datacube.Datacube.load) is required.


## Identify Baseline and Monitoring periods


## Time series z-normalization


## Classification


## OWS

To serve data indeced in the EODC as visualizations, datacube-ows provides the WMS web service endpoint to (in our case) a TerriaJS web map client, by [configuring](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cfg_wms.html) the OWS
- Styles: Styles and Layers are configured in the [`ows` configuration module](https://github.com/fotakide/drought/blob/main/ows/drought_config/ows_cfg_drought.py)
- Update: Periodically withing the EO pipelines, or at the end of each one, the OWS database [is triggered](https://github.com/fotakide/drought/blob/main/src/run_composites.py#L81) automatically [to be updated](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html).
- Reading: The images are loaded from NAS by [patching the URL](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cfg_layers.html#url-patching-patch-url-function) to the mounted volume inside the Docker container.
- Vizualization: The [WMS](http://localhost:9000/?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities) of the data indexed is provided to a [TerriaJS](https://terria.io/) client, and are available via a NGROK app (https://emt-datacube-viewer.ngrok.app/).

Implementation note:
 - *Dont' forget to allow file sharing in Docker*
 - [Initialization](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html#creating-or-updating-the-ows-schema):
  1. `docker exec -it drought-ows-drought_ows-1 bash`
  2. `datacube system check`
    - `Valid connection:       YES`
  3. `datacube-ows-update --schema --write-role odc_phd --read-role odc_phd`
  4. `datacube-ows-update --views`
  5. `datacube-ows-update`

## References

Hislop, S., Stone, C., Gibson, R.K., Roff, A., Choat, B., Nolan, R.H., Nguyen, T.H. and Carnegie, A.J., 2023. [Using dense Sentinel-2 time series to explore combined fire and drought impacts in eucalypt forests](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/forests-and-global-change/articles/10.3389/ffgc.2023.1018936). *Frontiers in Forests and Global Change*, 6, p.1018936.

Commit message:

baseline VI (mean and std) product

README.md, after:

# *Abies Cephalonica* Stress Monitoring in Greece

## Description
This research project analyzes drought impacts on Greek mountain ecosystems, focusing on fir forest (*Abies cephalonica*) die-off in regions such as Chelmos, Mainalo, Taygetos, Parnonas, and Epirus. The work includes environmental monitoring, GIS mapping, and climate data analysis, under the scope of providing valuable insights for the development of resilience and restoration strategies. [source: [dasarxeio.com](https://dasarxeio.com/2025/08/01/145507/?fbclid=IwQ0xDSwL56MVleHRuA2FlbQIxMQABHkbJokQhCMbPWyp9B5BhfTiQjc_i3rtFTZOzDlfeDrLWeoQALBKSSqs7HktX_aem_boICuxbIGToYjKLmx3ZoFQ)]

The extent of *Abies Cephalonica* species within the Natura 2000 network is provided by [FORESTLIFE](https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=56154daffc044c99a6a12083c4d814c6#overview) in vector format. 

The methodology is based on lessons learned from our work with [Copernicus Emergency Management Service (EMS)](https://emergency.copernicus.eu/), in activation [EMSN217 - Fire risk assessment in East Sardinia, Italy](https://riskandrecovery.emergency.copernicus.eu/EMSN217/).

## EODC Development
Based on [Open Data Cube](https://www.opendatacube.org/). For the EODC, the following steps have been completed:
1. Created a [database](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/database/setup.html) and [credentials](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/database/passing-configuration.html)
2. Created a Python `environment.yaml`
3. [Initialized](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/cli.html#datacube-system-init) the datacube schema
4. Generated a tiling grid schema covering the affected [Natura2000](https://natura2000.eea.europa.eu/) sites
5. [Defined EO products](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/product-definitions.html)
6. Verified dataset storage, indexing, and retrieval from NAS using EO3 datasets and EODC

### Tiling schema
The study area is divided into 21 tiles, each measuring 48 × 48 km. [Tile naming](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/guides/reference/collection_3_summary_grid/) follows a `x00y00` format without negative indices. In 20-m imagery this translates to `time×variables×2400×2400` pixel time series. A 2400×2400 size was found appropriate for an effective processing in a 32GB - 8 CPU configuration, with an average product delivery time of 7 minutes.

![Grid](wiki_img/Grid.jpg)

## Composite generation
The composite pipeline automates the creation of 20-m monthly median mosaics of Sentinel-2 L2A data using the [Planetary Computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a) through the [STAC catalog](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1).

### Key points
- **Input**: GeoJSON configuration files define the year–month and tile code to process. *Now configured in [`./src/run_composites.py#L36`](https://github.com/fotakide/DieOffMonitoring/blob/main/src/run_composites.py#L42).*
- **Data access**: Imagery is retrieved from the STAC catalog using [odc-stac](https://odc-stac.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), filtered by cloud cover (`≤70%`) and data quality (`nodata < 33%`).
- **Native resolutions**: Sentinel-2 provides bands both at 10 m and 20 m resolutions. Since 10 m bands are not natively [available at 20 m](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a), we apply the `rasterio.enums.Resampling.average` method to bin the resolution to 20m. 
  - Implementation note: *If it is applied on a subset the values may vary (due to starting pixel and shape of the raster), but if it applied on a whole granule the values are identical*. [Sen2Cor](https://step.esa.int/main/snap-supported-plugins/sen2cor/sen2cor-v2-12/) uses [`skimage.measure.block_reduce`](https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/blob/v0.25.2/skimage/measure/block.py#L5-L94) (and from [docs](https://scikit-image.org/docs/0.25.x/api/skimage.measure.html#skimage.measure.block_reduce)), as it can be found in [S2 MPC L2A ATBD](https://step.esa.int/thirdparties/sen2cor/2.10.0/docs/S2-PDGS-MPC-L2A-ATBD-V2.10.0.pdf), to perform 2×2 mean aggregation (binning), as it can be found in the `L2A_Tables.py` module. This is also available in `xarray`'s [`coarsen`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.coarsen.html#xarray-dataarray-coarsen) function, which is a replica of this function as stated [in this issue](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/2525). This ensures consistency with ESA’s Sen2Cor processing chain.
- **Baseline change**: Working with S2-L2A time series from MS PC requires a [baseline change](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/dataset/sentinel-2-l2a#Baseline-Change) [to Sen2Cor `4.00` ](https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/-/copernicus-sentinel-2-major-products-upgrade-upcoming). For scenes after `2022-01-05` (January 25th, 2022), an offset of `-1000` is applied.
- **Masking**: Cloud, shadow, cirrus, and snow/ice pixels are masked using the Scene Classification Layer (SCL).
- **Spectral indices**: [NDVI](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=58), [EVI](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=16), and [PSRI2](https://www.indexdatabase.de/db/i-single.php?id=69) are calculated per timestamp before median temporal reduction.
- **Reprojection**: Before reduction, the data cubes are aligned and reprojected in [ETRS89-extended / LAEA Europe (EPSG:3035)](https://epsg.io/3035) with [odc-geo](https://github.com/opendatacube/odc-geo), using `rasterio`'s [bilinear resampling](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/en/stable/topics/resampling.html). If more than two UTM zones are included, a mosaic is generated.
- **Compositing**: A [median temporal](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/generated/xarray.Dataset.median.html#xarray-dataset-median) composite is produced per tile and month.
- **Output**: Results are stored as Cloud-Optimized GeoTIFFs (COGs), with metadata ([dataset definitions](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/dataset-documents.html)) recorded in both [EO3 YAML](https://eodatasets.readthedocs.io/en/eodatasets3-1.9.3/) and [STAC JSON](https://pystac.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) formats for datacube indexing. The `assets`/`measurements` of the bands are recorded in paths relevant to the metadata document location. *To do so on a local machine, raster information were referenced [by explicitly providing geo and pixel](https://eodatasets.readthedocs.io/en/eodatasets3-1.9.3/_modules/eodatasets3/assemble.html#DatasetPrepare.note_measurement) information to the metadata preparation module.* To load the relevant paths of raster images from NAS into `xarray`, [url patching](https://opendatacube.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/indexed-data/generate/datacube.Datacube.load.html#datacube.Datacube.load) is required.


## Identify Baseline and Monitoring periods
Based on expert and in-situ knowledge, as well as following visual inspection of imagery, the baseline period was defined from **2020-Q1 to 2023-Q1**. The monitoring period was defined from **2023-Q2 onwards**.

## Time series z-normalization


## Reference data and Sampling strategy

## Anciliary Data
### Tree Canopy Density
To minimize the inclusion of pixels that are not cover by vegetation, or they are sparsly vegetated, we emply the [Tree Cover Density 2023 (raster 10 m, 100 m), Europe, yearly](https://land.copernicus.eu/en/products/high-resolution-layer-forests-and-tree-cover/tree-cover-density-2023-raster-10-m-100-m-europe-yearly) dataset. The dataset provides at pan-European level in the spatial resolution of 10 m and 100 m the level of tree cover density in a range from 0% to100% for the 2023 reference year. We use the [10m layer](https://doi.org/10.2909/e677441e-fb94-431c-b4f9-304f10e4dfd8) and apply a 30% density cover threshold to acquire the vegetated pixels. The dataset is provided by the vendor in EPSG:3035 - ETRS89-extended / LAEA Europe projection.

### Copernicus DEM (30m)


## Classification


## OWS
To serve data indeced in the EODC as visualizations, datacube-ows provides the WMS web service endpoint to (in our case) a TerriaJS web map client, by [configuring](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cfg_wms.html) the OWS
- Styles: Styles and Layers are configured in the [`ows` configuration module](https://github.com/fotakide/drought/blob/main/ows/drought_config/ows_cfg_drought.py)
- Update: Periodically withing the EO pipelines, or at the end of each one, the OWS database [is triggered](https://github.com/fotakide/drought/blob/main/src/run_composites.py#L81) automatically [to be updated](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html).
- Reading: The images are loaded from NAS by [patching the URL](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cfg_layers.html#url-patching-patch-url-function) to the mounted volume inside the Docker container.
- Vizualization: The [WMS](http://localhost:9000/?service=WMS&request=GetCapabilities) of the data indexed is provided to a [TerriaJS](https://terria.io/) client, and are available via a NGROK app (https://emt-datacube-viewer.ngrok.app/).

*Table 1.* Served dataset with ODC-OWS in TerriaMap.

| Product Layer | Description |
|--------|-------|
| Sentinel-2 L2A Composites  | The median monthly composites for all bands and vegetation indices |
| Normalized Sentinel-2 L2A Time series | The S2L2A median monthly composites normalized according to the mean and dtandard deviation from baseline 2020-Q1 - 2023-Q1  |
| Tree Canopy Density | The HRL layer of Tree Cover Density 2023 (raster 10 m): https://doi.org/10.2909/e677441e-fb94-431c-b4f9-304f10e4dfd8 |



Implementation note:
 - *Dont' forget to allow file sharing in Docker*
 - [Initialization](https://datacube-ows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html#creating-or-updating-the-ows-schema):
  1. `docker exec -it drought-ows-drought_ows-1 bash`
  2. `datacube system check`
    - `Valid connection:       YES`
  3. `datacube-ows-update --schema --write-role odc_phd --read-role odc_phd`
  4. `datacube-ows-update --views`
  5. `datacube-ows-update`

## References
Hislop, S., Stone, C., Gibson, R.K., Roff, A., Choat, B., Nolan, R.H., Nguyen, T.H. and Carnegie, A.J., 2023. [Using dense Sentinel-2 time series to explore combined fire and drought impacts in eucalypt forests](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/forests-and-global-change/articles/10.3389/ffgc.2023.1018936). *Frontiers in Forests and Global Change*, 6, p.1018936.
